Why New Housing Lowers or Raises RentsDisciplining the NIMBY/YIMBY debate with a simple framework.UNREASONABLE DOUBTANDJEPPE JOHANSENSEP 10, 202532ShareBy Jeppe JohansenOne of the most important discussions at the current moment revolves aroundhousing policies, especially whether or not to build more in cities, often referred to asthe NIMBY/YIMBY1 debate. From the new Derek Thompson and Ezra Klein bookAbundance to Sam Bowman’s examples, many people point to housing as one of themost important policy issues. However, I have long been unsatisMed with thearguments put forward by the pro-housing crowd, not because I think the argumentsare wrong, but rather because I feel they are insuOcient. Or put diPerently, they relyon a simple economic heuristic, namely that demand slopes downwards, so we just need tobuild more2, which I believe is insuOcient to reason about good housing policies. Theobservation about demand is correct; however, it seems not to take seriously what theNIMBY crowd (and basically the argument you will encounter when you are home forChristmas and speak with your distant family) is putting forward: Look how expensive itis to live in the city. This post presents a simple model built on a sound microeconomicfoundation that allows for multiple extensions, which can help people reason abouthousing markets and building-more-in-the-cities-arguments and other suggested policiesfor making the city more livable. The model also attempts to be accessible for a broadaudience, not only economists, so more people have a tool to dissect whether or notsuggested housing policies rest on coherent arguments.Thanks for reading! Subscribe for free to
1
© 2026Unreasonable Doubt · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection noticeSubstackis the home for great cultureWhy New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
1 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

receive new posts and support my work.The YIMBY argument basically relies on a very simple heuristic: demand slopesdownwards. This might be the most important Econ 101 observation: when things getmore expensive, people consume less of it, and conversely, if supply expands, the pricedrops. Concretely, in the case of housing, people often model housing (at least in theshort run) as perfectly inelastic: An expansion of the housing stock will lower thehousing price in the city.The NIMBY argument is harder to distil into a single tenet. Usually, it rests onenvironmental considerations, vague claims about the “vibe of the city”, but also,importantly for this post, that when we look at prices in cities versus rural areas,housing in cities is considerably more expensive. From there, a lot of people concludethat building more in the city will not lead to lower prices.Summarized into two plots, the YIMBY and NIMBY positions are, respectively:
In other words, the two arguments are both based on real observations, namely thatThe YIMBY and NIMBY crowds’ arguments
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
2 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

population density is empirically associated with higher housing prices, while a veryrobust Mnding from economics is that expanding the supply lowers the price.I am fundamentally a YIMBY person; however, I do believe the YIMBY crowd has notreally taken the observation from the NIMBY crowd seriously. At least at the surface,these two arguments do seem to be in con\ict with each other, and I wanted aframework for thinking about this in a disciplined way. I want the equivalent of astylized macroeconomic model (IS-LM/AD-AS) model for housing, with reasonablemicroeconomic foundations, that can be applied exclusively using graphical reasoning,which is what led me to formulate this model. Finally, let me note that this post doesnot contain the math behind the model, so it can be consumed by a larger crowd;however, the math does exist!First, let’s start by considering the individual household’s decision problem. Everyhousehold decides between living in the city or in a rural area, i.e., we make theassumption there are only two types of housing: city and rural, and for simplicity, theyare all alike.The households choose to live in the city if the income minus the price of housing ishigher in the city than in the rural area. Of course, this assumption can be adjusted toa more subtle utility formulation; however, it does not change the predictions.Distinguishing between the income in the city and the rural area, we say that in ruralareas, they get an average wage and some household-speciMc rural premium, while inthe city, the household also gets an average wage, some household-speciMc urbanpremium, and importantly, also an agglomeration premium. Concretely, this impliesthat the more people that live in the city, the more productive the city populationbecomes. This is very much in line with research from economics. We can thereforemake a stylized description of the utility of living in the city and in rural areas:A Simple Model of Housing
The Demand SideWhy New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
3 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

• Rural Utility: Rural Base Income + Household Speci;c Rural Premium- Rural Price• City Utility: City Base Income + Household Speci;c City Premium+ Agglomeration EAect - City PriceSummarizing, the individual household chooses to live where they have the highestincome the price of housing. We realize this is a function of the price delta. We cannow aggregate over all households in the economy, and express the aggregate demandfor living in the city as a function of the price delta between the city and rural areas.Note here an important observation: all individuals need to either live in the city or ina rural area. The implication being that when we know how many households live inthe city, we also know how many live in rural areas. The demand for living in the cityis shown in the Mgure below:
We now consider the supply side of the economy. In this part of the economy, we needto consider the supply of housing in both the city and rural areas.
The Supply Side
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
4 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

Since we have the population identity, i.e., all households must live either in cities orrural areas, we can also express the supply of rural housing as a function of the numberof people living in the city. That is like \ipping the supply for rural areas (green graph)along the vertical axis, so it starts from that total population line. This \ipping allowsus to gauge the price of housing in the city and in rural areas if we know how manypeople live in the city. Below is a plot that shows this:
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
5 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

We can also read oP all the feasible distributions of people living in the city and inrural areas directly from this plot. That is, we cannot have an equilibrium outside ofthe two vertical lines. This is due to the fact that the vertical lines show the capacity,and if we say we had an equilibrium to the left of the rural capacity, for example (greenvertical line), then there would be an excess number of people living in the city, i.e.,beyond the capacity of the city.If we now subtract the rural supply from the city supply, we get a supply function (ofboth city and rural areas) as a function of the population living in the city, with theprice delta on the Y-axis. Why is this important? Because it allows us to graph supplyagainst demand! All of a sudden, we can graphically reason about demand and supply!
Some useful things to observe about the demand and supply. The equilibrium is foundby looking at the diPerence between city and rural prices. In other words, we cannotdirectly read oP the graph what the price level is in the economy; we can only see thediPerence. Additionally, the slope of the demand (and supply) is important to
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
6 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

understand the sensitivity to shocks. The \atter the curve, the more sensitive, i.e., asmall shock in the form of a level change to either the demand or supply will implymany people moving either from or to the city.Below, we have the full model displayed. The top plot allows us to reason about pricesand which supply-side, either city or rural, is subject to a shock. The lower plot is usedfor reasoning about supply and demand generally in the economy.The Full Model
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
7 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

We can reason about two diPerent scenarios and how they propagate through themodel: demand shocks and supply shocks.Demand Shocks are easiest to reason about. Concretely, you start in the bottom plot.The shock to the demand curve will yield a new equilibrium (where supply anddemand intersect), which allows us to read on the x-axis the number of people living inthe city (and therefore also in rural areas), which we then can map to the top plot,where we can read oP the new prices3. Concretely, imagine the demand movedupwards/rightward. That corresponds to more people wanting to live in the city, whichagain allows us to move to the top Mgure, and read oP the prices, which now (ingeneral) will be higher in the city, and lower in rural areas. Summarizing, a demandshock requires:• Bottom plot: Move demand curve → New equilibrium implies a new citypopulation and new price diPerence.• Top plot: New city population → New prices.Supply Shocks require one more step to reason about. In that case, we start by movingthe relevant supply curve (this is what happens in the case below, where we simulate ahousing expansion). Concretely, we start in the top plot. We choose which of thesupply curves (or both) we want to move/shock. This yields a new aggregate supplycurve in the bottom plot. This again yields a new equilibrium, which can be read oPfrom the bottom plot where demand and aggregate supply curve intersect, yielding anew price diPerence, and a new equilibrium city (and rural) population. The adjustedcity population sets in motion a demand adjustment due to the agglomeration being afunction of the number of people living in the city. This corresponds to moving thedemand curve once more. Summarizing the agglomeration ePect: More people living inthe city implies even more people want to live in the city, and vice versa. The new demandcurve yields a new equilibrium, i.e., the price diPerence and city population adjust.
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
8 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

Moving back to the top plot, we can from the adjusted city population, read oP newprices in the city and rural areas. Summarizing the chain of events:• Top plot: Move the relevant supply curve (rural or city)• Bottom plot: Adjust supply curve → new equilibrium → new level ofagglomeration ePect → New demand curve → new equilibrium → new citypopulation and price diPerence.• Top plot: New city population → New prices.Now we consider one of the most often suggested policies, especially popular amongthe YIMBY crowd: we need to build more in the city! So in three phases (corresponding toblue, red, and green curves in the plots below), we investigate an increase in thehousing supply in the city.We start in the equilibrium shown below. This period is all drawn in blue. The bottomplot shows the equilibrium, where demand and supply intersect, and the blue dots inthe top plot show the initial equilibrium prices.Case: Expanding The Housing Stock InThe City
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
9 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

Now, more housing is built in the city. This leads to a supply curve of the city that ispushed down to the right (red). We see that both the expanded capacity (the verticalpart of the supply curve) is more rightward, and that the sloped part is moved down. Inthe bottom plot, we can see this is re\ected in a new aggregate supply curve, which(part of) is also moved down and to the right, yielding a new equilibrium. We can seethat more households now live in the city compared to the initial equilibrium, and(since demand slopes downwards) the price of housing in the city has becomerelatively cheaper compared to rural areas. In the top plot, we see that the generalprice level has decreased. That is, the prices in both the city and in rural areas have
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
10 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

fallen.
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
11 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

Now the agglomeration ePect kicks in and demand adjusts. The new, increasedpopulation in the city leads to agglomeration (i.e., it’s more desirable to live / peopleearn more in the city). This can be seen in the bottom plot as the new demand curve(green) is moved upwards to the right. This yields a new equilibrium where even morepeople live in the city. And even more troubling, the price diPerence has actuallyincreased compared to what it was initially! Additionally, when we move to the topplot, even though the prices fell with the initial expansion of the housing stock, thehouse prices in the city are actually now higher than they were initially. Theagglomeration ePect has dominated the initial supply ePect! The prices in rural areashave decreased even more.
Why New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
12 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

This example is the extreme case where agglomeration dominates the supply ePect.This is not a given feature of the model, but rather depends on individual belief in howstrong agglomeration ePects and other structural features of the model are. Again, thismodel should not be seen as a way to give precise predictions, but rather to disciplinereasoning in a debate that often seems to lack any sort of rigorous application of amodel and disciplined thinking. And now, when you encounter people arguing thatbuilding more in the city only raises prices, you know they must assumeagglomeration dominates the increased supply. At least if they want to be coherent.This blog presents a simple model that allows for graphical reasoning about housingpolicies based on sound micro foundation, i.e., optimizing households and reasonablesupply assumptions, and with the important feature of taking agglomeration ePectsseriously. An important takeaway is that it bridges two crowds, namely the NIMBYand YIMBY crowds, with a unifying framework that easily allows for extensions.Finally, I investigated one of, if not the most important case in housing policy, namelythe obvious just build more argument, and what is obvious is that this only leads tolower prices in the city if the agglomeration ePect does not end up dominating the
ConclusionWhy New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
13 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

supply ePect.Jeppe Johansen is a regular writer at Unreasonable Doubt, where he writes about aliens,economics, the integrity of institutions, and everything in between. Jeppe is a Postdoc at theCenter for Social Data Science at the University of Copenhagen.If you liked this article, you might also like our post on ideology and science. Subscribe to ourfeed for more content like this.1NIMBY is short for “Not in my backyard,” and YIMBY is for “Yes in my backyard”. Theseterms distinguish between anti- and pro-building more in the city (and in general) crowds.2Yes, there are special cases, but we are not considering those!3We wait to model agglomeration ePects in demand in the supply shock scenario.1 Like∙2 RestacksDiscussion about this post
Write a comment...Marcus SheraThe Econ Playground10. sep.Liked by Jeppe Johansen, Unreasonable Doubt
I have also thought that there may be something more like "club good effects" that are unique torural areas (or maybe suburbs) similar to agglomeration effects in cities. The attraction of cities isthe fact that there are increasing returns from specialization in many goods that benefit from muchCommentsRestacksWhy New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
14 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

2 more comments...2 replieslower transaction costs. In a rural area that is less dense, because of the fact that people have lessoptions outside of a small range of goods, people are more likely to dedicate to specific socialcommunities (clubs, churches, even just friend groups, etc.). The quality of the club good is afunction of how much of their time people dedicate to the good over others, and in a rural area withhigher costs of non-club activities, the club will be of higher quality. The sorting between cities andrural demand has to do with people's relative taste for the gains from agglomeration and the gainsfrom clubs.LIKED (3)REPLYWhy New Housing Lowers or Raises Rentshttps://unreasonabledoubt.substack.com/p/why-new-housing-lowers-or-...
15 af 1502/02/2026, 18.32

